DOCSP-44422 - Bulk write API (#257)
mongodb/docs-csharp: source/fundamentals/crud/write-operations/bulk-write.txt

   interface.

Select from the following tabs to view how to use the asynchronous
``BulkWriteAsync()`` method and the synchronous ``BulkWrite()`` method to
perform a bulk write operation.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Asynchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-async

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-async
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-async
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

   .. tab:: Synchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-sync

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-sync
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-sync
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

The preceding code examples produce the following output:

.. code-block:: shell
      
   BulkWriteResult({'writeErrors': [], 'writeConcernErrors': [], 'nInserted': 2, 'nUpserted': 0, 'nMatched': 2, 'nModified': 2, 'nRemoved': 1, 'upserted': []}, acknowledged=True)

.. tip::
    
    If any of the write operations fail, the {+driver-short+} raises a

>     ``BulkWriteException`` and does not perform any further operations. You can examine

Reviewer: It should be [ClientBulkWriteException](https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-csharp-driver/3.0.0/api/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.ClientBulkWriteException.html) instead.

         includes detailed results for each successful write operation.
       | Defaults to ``false``.

   * - ``WriteConcern``
     - | The write concern to use for the write operation, as a value from the ``WriteConcern``
         enum.
       | Defaults to the write concern of the collection on which the operation is running.

The following code examples use a ``ClientBulkWriteOptions`` object to customize
a delete operation:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Asynchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-options-async

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-options-async
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-options-async
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

   .. tab:: Synchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-options-sync

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
        :start-after: start-bulk-write-options-sync
        :end-before: end-bulk-write-options-sync
        :language: csharp
        :copyable:
        :dedent: 8

Return Value
------------

The ``BulkWrite()`` and ``BulkWriteAsync()`` methods return a ``ClientBulkWriteResult``

> object that contains the following properties:

Reviewer: Should we describe `ClientBulkWriteException` so users know how to find error responses? Based on the spec: https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/crud/bulk-write.md#exception

individual methods, each operation requires its own database call. If you use
a bulk write operation, you can improve efficiency by performing multiple write
operations in a single database call.

Sample Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

The examples in this guide use the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`. To learn how to create a
free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets, see the
:ref:`<csharp-quickstart>` tutorial.

Define the Write Operations
---------------------------

For each write operation you want to perform, create an instance of one of
the following ``BulkWriteModel`` classes:

- ``BulkWriteInsertOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteUpdateOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteUpdateManyModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteReplaceOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteDeleteOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteDeleteManyModel<TDocument>``

The following sections show how to create and use instances of the preceding classes
to perform the corresponding write operation in a bulk write.

.. tip:: Bulk Write Operations with POCOs

    The examples in this guide use the ``BsonDocument`` type for the ``TDocument`` type

>     in all generic classes. You can also use a Plain Old CLR Object (POCO) for these

Reviewer 2: Q: what does "in all generic classes" mean in this context?

Author: The classes on this page that use `TDocument` as a type parameter, like all of the BulkWriteModels. I'd expect this term to be familiar to C# devs using this page

   * - ``isUpsert``
     - | *Optional.* Specifies whether the update operation performs an upsert operation if no 
         documents match the query filter. See the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-upsert>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** {+bool-data-type+}
       | **Default:** ``false``

   * - ``arrayFilters``
     - | Specifies which array elements to modify for an update operation on an array field.
         See the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/update/#update-elements-match-arrayfilters-criteria>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** `IEnumerable<ArrayFilterDefinition> <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.generic.ienumerable-1?view=net-8.0>`__ 
       | **Default:** ``null``

In the following code example, the ``BulkWriteUpdateOneModel<BsonDocument>`` object
represents an update operation on the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection.
The operation matches the first document in the collection where the value of the ``name``
field is ``"Mongo's Deli"``. It then updates the value of the ``cuisine`` field in the

> matched document to ``"Sandwiches and Salads"``.

Reviewer 2: This sounds good to me as a model for the other sections!

Author: Think i got them all

.. _csharp-bulk-write:

=====================
Bulk Write Operations
=====================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: insert, update, replace, code example

Overview
--------

Consider a scenario in which you want to insert a document into a collection,
update multiple other documents, then delete a document. If you use
individual methods, each operation requires its own database call. This guide
shows you how to use bulk write operations to perform multiple write operations

> in a single database call.

Author: I didn't know there was another kind. The [server docs](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/bulk-write-operations/) imply that bulk writes are always client-initiated

Sample Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

The examples in this guide use the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`. To learn how to create a
free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets, see the
:ref:`<csharp-quickstart>` tutorial.

Define the Write Operations
---------------------------

For each write operation you want to perform, create an instance of one of
the following ``BulkWriteModel`` classes:

- ``BulkWriteInsertOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteUpdateOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteUpdateManyModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteReplaceOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteDeleteOneModel<TDocument>``
- ``BulkWriteDeleteManyModel<TDocument>``

The following sections show how to create and use instances of the preceding classes.

.. tip:: Bulk Write Operations with POCOs

    The examples in this guide use ``BsonDocument`` as the type for ``TDocument``.

>     You can also use a Plain Old CLR Object (POCO) as the type for ``TDocument``.

Author: reworded

    
    To use a POCO, define a class that represents the documents in your collection.
    The class must have properties that match the fields in your documents.
    For more information, see :ref:`<csharp-poco>`.

Insert Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To perform an insert operation, create an instance of the
``BulkWriteInsertOneModel<TDocument>`` class.
The ``BulkWriteInsertOneModel<TDocument>`` constructor accepts the following parameters:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Parameter
     - Description
   
   * - ``collectionNamespace``
     - | The database and collection to insert the BSON document into.
       |
       | **Data Type:** {+string-data-type+} or `CollectionNamespace <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.CollectionNamespace.html>`__

   * - ``document``
     - | The document to insert into the collection.
       |
       | **Data Type:** ``TDocument``

The following example creates an instance of the ``BulkWriteInsertOneModel<TDocument>``
class. The
``BsonDocument`` object represents a new restaurant named "Mongo's Deli" to be inserted

> into the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection.

Author: Could you elaborate on what to avoid? I'm trying to think of another way to say it, because I'd normally use "model" in the context of data models; i.e., a POCO, or class that mirrors a specific document structure.

> into the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection.

Reviewer 2: I meant that we might prefer to avoid interchangeably referring to documents/C# types and restaurants. 
Looking back on my suggestion, it seems a bit clunky. Maybe something like:

> The ``BulkWriteInsertOneModel`` directs the driver to insert a document in which the ``name`` field value is ``"Mongo's Deli"`` into the ``restaurants`` collection.

       | **Default:** ``null``
   
   * - ``hint``
     - | *Optional.* The index to use to scan for documents. 
         See the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** `BsonValue <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Bson/MongoDB.Bson.BsonValue.html>`__
       | **Default:** ``null``

   * - ``isUpsert``
     - | *Optional.* Specifies whether the update operation performs an upsert operation if no 
         documents match the query filter. 
         See the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-upsert>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** {+bool-data-type+}
       | **Default:** ``false``

The following example creates an instance of the ``BulkWriteReplaceOneModel<TDocument>``
class, and uses ``BsonDocument`` as the type for ``TDocument``. The
filter matches the document in the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
where the value of the ``restaurant_id`` field is ``"1234"``. The replace operation
removes all fields from this document and sets new values in the ``name``, ``cuisine``,

> ``borough``, and ``restaurant_id`` fields.

Author: The new version hews closer to the copy from [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-csharp/pull/257/files#r1806876879), but let me know if you think it still needs changes

         query filter.
       |
       | **Data Type:** `FilterDefinition<TDocument> <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.FilterDefinition-1.html>`__

   * - ``collation``
     - | *Optional.* The language collation to use when sorting results. See
         the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/delete/#std-label-deletes-array-collation>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** `Collation <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.Collation.html>`__
       | **Default:** ``null``
   
   * - ``hint``
     - | *Optional.* The index to use to scan for documents. 
         See the :manual:`{+mdb-server+} manual</reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         for more information.
       |
       | **Data Type:** `BsonValue <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Bson/MongoDB.Bson.BsonValue.html>`__
       | **Default:** ``null``

The following example creates an instance of the ``BulkWriteDeleteOneModel<TDocument>``
class, and uses ``BsonDocument`` as the type for ``TDocument``. The
filter matches the document in the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection

> where the value of the ``restaurant_id`` field is ``"5678"``.

Author: The new version hews closer to the copy from [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-csharp/pull/257/files#r1806876879), but let me know if you think it still needs changes

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
   :start-after: start-bulk-delete-one
   :end-before: end-bulk-delete-one
   :language: csharp
   :copyable:
   :dedent: 8

To delete multiple documents, create an instance of the ``BulkWriteDeleteManyModel<TDocument>``
class and pass a query filter that specifies the document that you want to delete.
The ``DeleteMany`` operation removes *all documents* that match your
query filter.

The following example creates an instance of the ``BulkWriteDeleteManyModel<TDocument>``
class, and uses ``BsonDocument`` as the type for ``TDocument``. The
filter matches the document in the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection

> where the value of the ``name`` field is ``"Mongo's Deli"``.

Author: The new version hews closer to the copy from [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-csharp/pull/257/files#r1806876879), but let me know if you think it still needs changes

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
   :start-after: start-bulk-delete-many
   :end-before: end-bulk-delete-many
   :language: csharp
   :copyable:
   :dedent: 8

Run the Write Operations
------------------------

> After you define a ``BulkWriteModel`` instance for each operation that you want to perform,
> pass an ``IReadOnlyList`` collection of these instances to the ``BulkWrite()`` or
> ``BulkWriteAsync()`` method. By default, these methods run the operations in the order
> they're defined in the collection.

Reviewer 2: S: avoid using "collection" here to avoid ambiguity
```suggestion
After you define a ``BulkWriteModel`` instance for each operation that you want to perform,
create an instance of a type that implements ``IReadOnlyList`` to store your models.
Then, pass the list to the ``BulkWrite()`` or
``BulkWriteAsync()`` method. By default, these methods run the operations in the order
they're defined in the list.
```

Author: tricky ambiguity with "collection", and "list" is its own C# type. tried to reword

.. tip:: IReadOnlyList

   ``Array`` and ``List`` are two common classes that implement the ``IReadOnlyList``
   interface.

> The following code examples show how to use the asynchronous
> ``BulkWriteAsync()`` method and the synchronous ``BulkWrite()`` method to
> perform multiple write operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select from the following tabs to view how to use the asynchronous
``BulkWriteAsync()`` method and the synchronous ``BulkWrite()`` method to
perform a bulk write operation.
```

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Asynchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-async

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-async
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-async
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

   .. tab:: Synchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-sync

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-sync
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-sync
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

The preceding code examples produce the following output:

.. code-block:: shell
      
   BulkWriteResult({'writeErrors': [], 'writeConcernErrors': [], 'nInserted': 2, 'nUpserted': 0, 'nMatched': 2, 'nModified': 2, 'nRemoved': 1, 'upserted': []}, acknowledged=True)

.. tip:: Troubleshooting Bulk Write Operations
    
    If any of the write operations fail, the {+driver-short+} raises a
    ``BulkWriteException`` and does not perform any further operations. You can examine

>     the properties of the exception to determine which operation failed.

Reviewer 2: S: Is this note necessary? It doesn't provide specific guidance on troubleshooting

Author: Maybe "troubleshooting" isn't the best title. the point is really the first sentence. reworded.

         enum.
       | Defaults to the write concern of the collection on which the operation is running.

The following code examples use a ``ClientBulkWriteOptions`` object to customize
a delete operation:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Asynchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-options-async

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
         :start-after: start-bulk-write-options-async
         :end-before: end-bulk-write-options-async
         :language: csharp
         :copyable:
         :dedent: 8

   .. tab:: Synchronous
      :tabid: bulk-write-options-sync

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BulkWrite.cs
        :start-after: start-bulk-write-options-sync
        :end-before: end-bulk-write-options-sync
        :language: csharp
        :copyable:
        :dedent: 8

.. note:: Unordered Bulk Write Operations

   Unordered bulk operations do not guarantee order of execution. The order can
   differ from the way you list them to optimize the runtime.
   
   If any of the write operations in an unordered bulk write fail, the driver

>    reports the errors only after attempting all operations.

Reviewer 2: S: move this note directly under the table

Author: moved some things around
